---
layout: post-right-sidebar
title:  "Is India ready for Federalism?"
author: Ravi
categories: [ Jekyll, tutorial ]
image: assets/images/india.jpg
---
India as an independent nation is about to complete seventy-five years of freedom from colonial rule. Thirty years is generally considered as a generational span, which is the average time taken for children born to become adults and have in turn children born to them. In that sense we have the third generation of citizens born in free India currently at the  threshold of their teens. It is indeed time to ask ourselves some uncomfortable questions. What sort of future is reckoning these kids?  How have we as a nation and as the generations preceding them fared in enabling their ascendancy in terms competence, engagement and quality of life?

The answers to these questions unfortunately are nothing to write home about. The low score in terms of Human Development Index (HDI) would speak for itself. India’s HDI rank as per World Economic Forum Report of 2019 is 129 out of 189 nations covered. Our rank has just gone up by one place over the five-year period 2013 to 2018. If we look at the inter-state comparison of HDI, the lumping of the Hindi heartland states of Bihar, MP and UP at the bottom of the heap is a sad tale of development deficit. If we take all Hindi-speaking States representing almost half of our population, their average HDI is significantly less than the Southern states.

The crux of the story is that unless we lift the HDI of Hindi belt, our overall story will remain pathetic. It is in this context that we need to seriously look at the model of governance and priorities for development that we have been following for years. India is too large and too complex to be taken as one coherent and uniform economy. Our regional differences are the results of history, culture and demography. Painting India with one brush has not yielded results, nor is it likely to in foreseeable future. What we need is a localised, customised and intensive model of development where bottom up initiatives need to be curated widely.

We need to reinvent the role, relevance and effectiveness of States in the overall federal structure of governance. The pandemic has struck a severe blow and shaken our federal governance structure.  The comfort zone our elected representatives and bureaucrats are long used to has been breached by the crisis. Any voices of dissent or expressions of frustration with the progress are quickly painted as exuberant activism detrimental to the stability! The time has perhaps come when the old rules of playing for status quo would no longer work.

It was quite a spectacle to observe how in the wake of the pandemic, the political parties, governments and leaders were scurrying restlessly like the proverbial blindmen trying to recognize and interpret the elephant in the room. After two months of the crisis, discerning observers can identify the performers, preservers and laggards among our political leaders. Without looking at their political leanings, going merely by the consistency of response,  empathy and clarity of purpose, the two leaders who stand out are Pinarayi Vijayan, the Chief Minister of Kerala and Yogi Aditya Nath his counterpart from UP. While their world views and ideological convictions hardly meet, as leaders responsible to provide relief, order and confidence to their people they have so far fared well above the rest.

Kerala has nearly world-standard human development indicators and a history of reliable public health, public distribution system and public education infrastructure. Pinarayi Vijayan has led from the front and blunted attempts by political opponents to play the usual politics of negativism. He has by and large succeeded in leveraging the advantages and promoting public confidence in the ability of the government to respond to the situation.

UP consistently figures at the bottom on most of the social infrastructure.    Yet the compassion, reaching out and messaging by Yogi in this hour of crisis for the streams of returning migrants deserve appreciation. The situation in India’s most commercially important state, Maharashtra draws a meek comparison to the two examples. Despite showing flashes of strategic leadership, inexperience and absence of cohesion in the ruling dispensation apparently weighed heavily  on  Udhav Thakre. The response of Mamata Banerjee and Nitish Kumar, both seasoned politicians with mass appeal leaves one perplexed as to where the focus, drive and firmness of purpose disappeared. Undoubtedly, Bihar and West Bengal with a massive stock of returning migrant labour had the opportunity to rise to the occasion in providing solace and support far beyond what they did.

One of the lessons of the pandemic experience is the need for bolstering our federal governance structure by strengthening the role, responsibilities, resources and processes at the State level. The port of first call for issues and concerns of the people of this vast and diverse land has to be the State Government. The strategic role of the Federal Government should be elevated to visioning, planning and enabling  the States and the people to progress towards prosperity, wellness and global competitiveness. The culture of political blame-game, tendency for usurping power and lack of collaborative spirit have been the bane of our polity for long.

Unfortunately, the political history of post-independent India has seen a systematic erosion of the power and accountability of State Governments to deliver citizen services.

The fundamental question is whether India is a federation of states in the sense that we understand the United States or United Kingdom is. While the US or the UK is structured as the voluntary union of sub-nationalities, the Indian constitution states that we are a Union of States. The States in Indian context are mere administrative units while in US or UK there is a clear and unmistakeable individuality for the constituent units in terms of political identity. The same is reflected in the structure and practices of fiscal and administrative devolution.  

We need to realise that India today is far more politically evolved than at the threshold of independence. The States were formed by merging areas that were historically under different administrations. At the time of forming linguistic states, cultural affinity was given predominance over economic pragmatism. However, over the years since reorganization, the newly demarcated states and their sub-cultures have acquired strong sub-national identities. In fact, the dynamics of assertive regional identities resulted in bifurcations of some states. The smaller states have by and large proved effective as efficient administrative units.  

In this socio-political context, the States as the primary units of governance have to be strengthened and empowered. The pandemic responses demonstrate the need for reinforcing state level governance competence and empowerment. Assertion and execution of regional development and social empowerment can best  happen if states are structurally and resource-wise strong enough to plan and implement mission-mode transformation programs.

Let the recent experience reinforce our resolve to consolidate regional empowerment rather than regressing back to over-centralisation. States with vision, skills and resources can only create opportunities for employment and entrepreneurship across the nation. Regional focus in developing the Hind-heartland states is the only solution to making the nation break out of the entropy of mediocrity and release our cities from overcrowding and miserable living conditions. 