---
layout: post-right-sidebar
author: Ravi
title: Is Kerala’s Development Model under Threat?
categories:
- economics
image: assets/images/kerala-image.jpg
featured: false

---
Kerala’s economy has had an easy ride for many decades on the back of inward remittances, predominantly from the Gulf countries. As long as the till kept rolling in cash, the air of deceptive prosperity amidst the lush green landscape would linger. The tides seem to be turning for the worse. The headwinds of the post-Covid realities portend to a not-so- optimistic future, at least in the near term.

There is significant disruption in the premises of the much-hyped Kerala Model. The emerging situation calls for realignment of policies to sync with the expected scale up of digital economy. Industry 4.0 would usher in smart manufacturing probably sooner than expected. But a concern of immediate consequences to Kerala is the inevitable deleveraging of local economy from the swings in the Gulf countries’ fortunes.

Let us look at the critical trends in emigration, remittances and domestic employment.

_Firstly_, t**here is a distinct shift in employment-focused emigration of low skilled workforce**. In the list of top-50 districts in India from where most low-skilled Indians migrated in 2019, only one is in Kerala. The list compiled by the Ministry of External Affairs - based on _“Emigration Clearance Required (ECR)”_ stamp in the passports- is dominated by Uttar Pradesh with 21 districts and Bihar with 7 figuring in the 50. That makes it a predominant 54% share for the two Hindi heartland States. A couple of decades back the Southern States of Kerala and Tamil Nadu used to account for the lion’s share of emigrants even in low skill jobs.

An ECR Stamp is mandatory for those with less than class-10 level education and hence indicates their lack or low level of vocational training and certification. The shifting pattern of source of low-skill migration from the Southern States to the Gangetic belt indicates two district macro level human capital changes. The first characteristic is the continuing low level of human development in the North and East of India which continue to send low skill resources for overseas engagement. The second aspect is the gradual but clear upward mobility of the skill mix of the Southern States which used to serve as low skill supply sources earlier. The next generation of the original low skill emigrant workers comprise of job seekers with higher and in-demand skills.

Another reason for shift in source markets to the new supply bases in the North and East of India is pure and simple market dynamics. There is significant wage differential between the established labour markets like Kerala, Tamil Nadu or Punjab compared to niche markets like UP or Bihar. It makes financial sense for recruiters to source low-skill labour from new markets. Lack of awareness of wage benchmark based on previous migrants from these localities as well as meagre wage levels prevailing locally push the workers from these markets to accept near sustenance level wages.

The shift in labour emigration pattern to the low wage niche markets would swell the number of jobless, underemployed and marginalised workforce in the erstwhile hotspots of emigration. Kerala’s residual low skill workforce would get trapped in this dilemma. Further, the availability of emigration opportunities for low-skill labour from the Northern and Eastern states is likely to result in shortfall in the availability of workforce in domestic markets. A significant number of unskilled and low skill workers from the Hindi belt, Orissa, Assam and West Bengal have been working in Kerala. Already, the reverse migration to home states set off due to the pandemic induced scare and loss of livelihood has put enormous strain on the supply of low skill category workforce. The possibility of opportunities in the overseas markets like the Gulf countries would deter at least some domestic migrants from returning to their previous domestic employers. The wage demand of domestic migrants as and when they return would also be escalated. A serious mismatch of labour requirements and availability is likely to trouble domestic industries and even agriculture and service sectors for some time.

_Secondly,_ the economy is already experiencing a major **fall in remittances – both from within the country and from abroad** due to shrinking employment. Overall inward remittance to India is likely to take a hit of more than 25% in the current financial year, mainly due to Covid impact on economic activities globally. On the other side of the pandemic, a battered global economy, a sobered outlook to migration of labour and socio-economic pressures for less globalisation and more localisation would probably limit global remittances from bouncing back to pre-Covid levels soon.

Within India, **the pattern of inward remittances is undergoing disruption** with increase in the inflow to the newer labour markets in the North and East of India and decrease in money coming to traditional emigration hotspots. _As late as 2018, according to RBI data 50 % of foreign_ [_remittances_](https://www.business-standard.com/topic/remittances) _went to Kerala, Maharashtra and Karnataka._ Kerala received a fifth of the total inflow into India, while UP (3.1 %) and Bihar (1.3 %) had a miniscule share of remittances. The share of the Northern States would show improvement over the next few years. There is a significant slump in the estimated inward remittances to Kerala in the short to medium term.

In Kerala, the impact of dwindling remittances is already having a visible effect on slowing down of economic activities across the State. With lower income levels, consumption is set to slide. Even after possible taming of Covid outrage, **the Gulf economies reeling under multiple economic and geopolitical pressures are less likely to bounce back as luring labour markets** for low end of talent. Economic activities, bank deposits, land and real estate deals as well as overall spending would slow down and Kerala’s State GDP and Government Revenues are likely to take a hit as a result.

The _third_ reality of the emerging economic scenario in India is **the changing mix of economic activities and employment opportunities.** The fast expanding employment in services sector would perhaps get moderated in the near term due among other reasons to extensive digitalisation. This would mean less demand for routine front-end employment and an increase in the profile and package of Technology jobs. _There is likely to be a qualitative upgrade and a quantitative moderation in jobs in IT-enabled services industry._

In the national context, with clarity and focus emerging on ‘_Make in India – Make for the World’ and ‘Atm Nirbhar Bharat’ campaigns,_ Manufacturing and Agri-Tech Sectors would see significant employment generation over the next decade.

**Changing geopolitical perceptions and enhanced image of India on “ease of business” are creating for the first time an opportunity to upgrade Indian manufacturing to globally competitive scale.** While there are serious efforts still needed on structural reforms and governmental facilitation for global corporate giants to move in, _stepping up manufacturing is not just an option but an imperative for India at this juncture._ It looks likely that this time the Government would bite the bullet. The bulk of the employment opportunities would be in manufacturing, digital technologies and upgraded service industry. Sectors like Pharmaceuticals, Bio-technology, R&D, Design and Engineering Services.

Looking from Kerala’s perspectives, the next phase of economic development offers stiff challenges. Scope is rather limited for a major upgrade of manufacturing sector in the State. Land is too costly even for critical infrastructure development let alone developing large manufacturing and Technology hubs. We have long created a political culture in Kerala where leaders and parties exploit social apprehensions on parting with land even at rates far above national average. _Even key projects for road, rail, airport, gas pipeline, power lines and other installations are enormously delayed and often costs are inflated to unviable levels_. Capital and entrepreneurship have traditionally been reluctant to locate to the Kerala business eco system. History of restrictive labour practices including the notorious _“nokku kooli”_ (ghost money extorted for loading/unloading) have not helped to create a business-friendly environment. How many of the top ten industrial houses of India have invested significantly in Kerala in all these years since independence? Among the few who did, how many would be glad to invest more?

It is quite unlikely that in the new economy that is in the making with heightened stress on manufacturing and large knowledge/technology and logistics hubs, Kerala would become a major player. Hence creating jobs would remain a challenge – the weaker Gulf eco system would aggravate the prospects.

_Lastly, in order to take advantage of the emerging growth opportunities_ **Kerala has to shake off the rigid and obsessive antagonism to private investment and capital flows.** _Privatisation has to be accepted as a normal and universal economic practice._ After all, when a non-core public sector is privatised, it brings in capital for upgrade and consolidation of the enterprise, enhances professional management and creates clearer accountability for productive deployment of resources. Public listing brings in broader ownership.

Today none of the Kerala Public Enterprises are of a strategic size to make any economic impact on the State GDP let alone become a national player. There is not even one State Public Enterprise of Kerala which is listed. There is need for political willingness and a non-partisan consensus to clean up the mess and streamline the Government owned Enterprises?

If the above trends and strategic choices are not considered seriously and acted up on with alacrity, Kerala would remain as economic backwaters of the emerging USD 5 Trillion Indian economy over the next decade. It is a pity if a land of 35 Million people with most demographic indicators much above the national average misses out on the opportunity to be in the forefront of economic resurgence because the archaic ecosystem and rigid mindset that obstructs breakthrough thinking. Are we ready to take the plunge to craft Kerala Model 2.0 that is based on contemporary ground realities and would enable a more open, liberal, growth-oriented economy in the State?